@@@ Part 1: Introduction
The Equality Act 2010
1.

The Equality Act 2010 prohibits discrimination against people with
the protected characteristics that are specified in section 4 of the Act.
Disability is one of the specified protected characteristics. Protection
from discrimination for disabled people applies to disabled people in a
range of circumstances, covering the provision of goods, facilities and
services, the exercise of public functions, premises, work, education,
and associations. Only those disabled people who are defined as
disabled in accordance with section 6 of the Act, and the associated
Schedules and regulations made under that section, will be entitled
to the protection that the Act provides to disabled people. However,
the Act also provides protection for non-disabled people who are
subjected to direct discrimination or harassment because of their
association with a disabled person or because they are wrongly
perceived to be disabled.
@@>
@@@ Using the guidance
2.

This guidance is primarily designed for adjudicating bodies which
determine cases brought under the Act. The definition of disability for
the purposes of the Act is a legal definition and it is only adjudicating
bodies which can determine whether a person meets that definition.
However, the guidance is also likely to be of value to a range of people
and organisations as an explanation of how the definition operates.
@@>
@@@ 3.

In the vast majority of cases there is unlikely to be any doubt
whether or not a person has or has had a disability, but this
guidance should prove helpful in cases where the matter is not
entirely clear.
@@>
@@@ 4.

The Act generally defines a disabled person as a person with a
disability. A person has a disability for the purposes of the Act if he or
she has a physical or mental impairment and the impairment has a
substantial and long-term adverse effect on his or her ability to carry
out normal day-to-day activities. Therefore, the general definition
of disability has a number of elements. The Guidance covers each of
these elements in turn. Each section contains an explanation of the
relevant provisions of the Act which supplement the basic definition.
Guidance and illustrative examples are provided where relevant.
Those using this Guidance for the first time should read it all, as
each part of the Guidance builds upon the part(s) preceding it. It is
important not to consider any individual element in isolation.
@@>
@@@ 5.

Throughout the guidance, descriptions of statutory provisions in
the legislation are immediately preceded by bold text and followed
by a reference to the relevant provision of the Act or to regulations
made under the Act. References to sections of the Act are marked
‘S’; references to schedules are marked ‘Sch’; and references to
paragraphs in schedules are marked ‘Para’.
@@>
@@@ Other references to ‘disability’
6.

The definition of disability set out in the Act and described in this
guidance is the only definition relevant to determining whether
someone is a disabled person for the purposes of the Act. References
to ‘disability’ or to mental or physical impairments in the context
of other legislation are not necessarily relevant but may assist
adjudicating bodies when determining whether someone is a disabled
person in accordance with the definition in this Act.
@@>
@@@ 7.
There is a range of services, concessions, schemes and financial
benefits for which disabled people may qualify. These include, for
example: local authority services for disabled people; the Blue Badge
parking scheme; tax concessions for people who are blind; and
disability-related social security benefits. However, each of these has
its own individual eligibility criteria and qualification for any one of
them does not automatically confer entitlement to protection under
the Act, nor does entitlement to the protection of the Act confer
eligibility for benefits, or concessions. Similarly, a child who has been
identified as having special educational needs is not necessarily
disabled for the purposes of the Act. However, having eligibility for
such benefits may assist a person to demonstrate that they meet the
definition in the Act.
@@>
@@@ 8.
In order to be protected by the Act, a person must have an
impairment that meets the Act’s definition of disability, or be able
to establish that any less favourable treatment or harassment is
because of another person’s disability or because of a perceived
disability.
@@>
@@@ Part 2: Guidance on matters to be taken into account in determining
questions relating to the definition of disability
@@>
@@@ Section A: The Definition
Main elements of the definition of disability
@@>
@@@ A1.

The Act defines a disabled person as a person with a disability. A
person has a disability for the purposes of the Act if he or she has a
physical or mental impairment and the impairment has a substantial
and long-term adverse effect on his or her ability to carry out normal
day-to-day activities (S6(1)).
@@>
@@@ A2.This means that, in general:

•	the person must have an impairment that is either physical or
mental (see paragraphs A3 to A8);

•	the impairment must have adverse effects which are substantial
(see Section B);

•	the substantial adverse effects must be long-term (see Section C);
and

•	the long-term substantial adverse effects must be effects on
normal day-to-day activities (see Section D).

This definition is subject to the provisions in Schedule 1 (Sch1).
All of the factors above must be considered when determining whether a
person is disabled.

@@>
@@@ Meaning of ‘impairment’ A3.

The definition requires that the effects which a person may experience
must arise from a physical or mental impairment. The term mental
or physical impairment should be given its ordinary meaning. It is not
necessary for the cause of the impairment to be established, nor does
the impairment have to be the result of an illness. In many cases,
there will be no dispute whether a person has an impairment. Any
disagreement is more likely to be about whether the effects of the
impairment are sufficient to fall within the definition and in particular
whether they are long-term. Even so, it may sometimes be necessary
to decide whether a person has an impairment so as to be able to
deal with the issues about its effects.
@@>
@@@ A4. Whether a person is disabled for the purposes of the Act is generally
determined by reference to the effect that an impairment has on that
person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. An exception
to this is a person with severe disfigurement (see paragraph B24). It
is not possible to provide an exhaustive list of conditions that qualify
as impairments for the purposes of the Act. Any attempt to do so
would inevitably become out of date as medical knowledge advanced.
@@>
@@@ A5.		 A disability can arise from a wide range of impairments which can be:
•	 sensory impairments, such as those affecting sight or hearing;
•	 impairments with fluctuating or recurring effects such as rheumatoid arthritis, myalgic encephalitis (ME), chronic fatigue
syndrome (CFS), fibromyalgia, depression and epilepsy;
•	 progressive, such as motor neurone disease, muscular dystrophy,
and forms of dementia;
•	 auto-immune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosis
(SLE);
•	 organ specific, including respiratory conditions, such as asthma,
and cardiovascular diseases, including thrombosis, stroke and heart
disease;
• developmental, such as autistic spectrum disorders (ASD), dyslexia
and dyspraxia;
• learning disabilities; mental illnesses, such as depression and schizophrenia;
mental health conditions with symptoms such as anxiety, low
mood, panic attacks, phobias, or unshared perceptions; eating
disorders; bipolar affective disorders; obsessive compulsive
disorders; personality disorders; post traumatic stress disorder, and
some self-harming behaviour; produced by injury to the body, including to the brain.
@@>
@@@ A6.
It may not always be possible, nor is it necessary, to categorise
a condition as either a physical or a mental impairment. The
underlying cause of the impairment may be hard to establish. There
may be adverse effects which are both physical and mental in nature.
Furthermore, effects of a mainly physical nature may stem from an
underlying mental impairment, and vice versa.
@@>
@@@ A7.
It is not necessary to consider how an impairment is caused, even
if the cause is a consequence of a condition which is excluded. For
example, liver disease as a result of alcohol dependency would count
as an impairment, although an addiction to alcohol itself is expressly
excluded from the scope of the definition of disability in the Act. What
it is important to consider is the effect of an impairment, not its cause
– provided that it is not an excluded condition. (See also paragraph
@@>
@@@ A12 (exclusions from the definition).)
A woman is obese. Her obesity in itself is not an impairment, but
it causes breathing and mobility difficulties which substantially
adversely affect her ability to walk.
A man has a borderline moderate learning disability which has an
adverse impact on his short-term memory and his levels of literacy
and numeracy. For example, he cannot write any original material,
as opposed to slowly copying existing text, and he cannot write his
address from memory.
It is the effects of these impairments that need to be considered,
rather than the underlying conditions themselves
@@>
@@@ A8.
It is important to remember that not all impairments are readily
identifiable. While some impairments, particularly visible ones,
are easy to identify, there are many which are not so immediately
obvious, for example some mental health conditions and learning
disabilities.

Persons with HIV infection, cancer and
multiple sclerosis
@@>
@@@ A9.
The Act states that a person who has cancer, HIV infection or
multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disabled person. This means that the
person is protected by the Act effectively from the point of diagnosis.
(Sch1, Para 6). (See also paragraphs B18 to23 (progressive
conditions).)
@@>
@@@ Persons deemed to be disabled A10.
The Act provides for certain people to be deemed to meet the
definition of disability without having to show that they have an
impairment that has (or is likely to have) a substantial and long-term
adverse effect on the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.
Regulations provide for a person who is certified as blind, severely
sight impaired, sight impaired or partially sighted by a consultant
ophthalmologist to be deemed to have a disability2. (Sch1, Para 7)
@@>
@@@ A11.
Anyone who has an impairment which is not covered by paragraphs
A9 and A10 will need to meet the requirements of the definition as
set out in paragraph A1 in order to demonstrate that he or she has a
disability under the Act. (But see paragraphs A16 to A17 for details
of some people who are treated as having had a past disability.)
@@>
@@@ Exclusions from the definition A12.
Certain conditions are not to be regarded as impairments for the
purposes of the Act3. These are:
•	 addiction to, or dependency on, alcohol, nicotine, or any other
substance (other than in consequence of the substance being
medically prescribed);
•	 the condition known as seasonal allergic rhinitis (e.g. hayfever),
except where it aggravates the effect of another condition;
•	 tendency to set fires;
•	 tendency to steal;
•	 tendency to physical or sexual abuse of other persons;
•	 exhibitionism;
•	 voyeurism.
@@>
@@@ A13. The exclusions apply where the tendency to set fires, tendency
to steal, tendency to physical or sexual abuse of other persons,
exhibitionism, or voyeurism constitute an impairment in themselves.
The exclusions also apply where these tendencies arise as a
consequence of, or a manifestation of, an impairment that constitutes
a disability for the purposes of the Act. It is important to determine
the basis for the alleged discrimination. If the alleged discrimination
was a result of an excluded condition, the exclusion will apply.
However, if the alleged discrimination was specifically related to
the actual disability which gave rise to the excluded condition, the
exclusion will not apply. Whether the exclusion applies will depend on
all the facts of the individual case.
A young man has Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
which manifests itself in a number of ways, including exhibitionism
and an inability to concentrate. The disorder, as an impairment which
has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on the young person’s
ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities, would be a disability
for the purposes of the Act.
The young man is not entitled to the protection of the Act in relation
to any discrimination he experiences as a consequence of his
exhibitionism, because that is an excluded condition under the Act.
However, he would be protected in relation to any discrimination
that he experiences in relation to the non-excluded effects of his
condition, such as inability to concentrate. For example, he would
be entitled to any reasonable adjustments that are required as a
consequence of those effects.
@@>
@@@ A14. A person with an excluded condition may nevertheless be protected
as a disabled person if he or she has an accompanying impairment
which meets the\n requirements of the definition. For example, a
person who is addicted to a substance such as alcohol may also have
depression, or a physical impairment such as liver damage, arising
from the alcohol addiction. While this person would not meet the
definition simply on the basis of having an addiction, he or she may
still meet the definition as a result of the effects of the depression or
the liver damage.
@@>
@@@ A15. Disfigurements which consist of a tattoo (which has not been
removed), non-medical body piercing, or something attached
through such piercing, are to be treated as not having a substantial
adverse effect on the person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day
activities4. (See also paragraphs B24 to B26.)
@@>
@@@ People who have had a disability in the past A16. The Act says that, except for the provisions in Part 12 (Transport5)
and section 190 (improvements to let dwelling houses), the provisions
of the Act also apply in relation to a person who previously has had
a disability as defined in paragraphs A1 and A2 (S6(4) and Sch1,
Para 9). This means that someone who is no longer disabled, but
who met the requirements of the definition in the past, will still be
covered by the Act. Also protected would be someone who continues
to experience debilitating effects as a result of treatment for a past
disability.
Four years ago, a woman experienced a mental illness that had a
substantial and long-term adverse effect on her ability to carry
out normal day-to-day activities, so it met the Act’s definition of
disability. She has experienced no recurrence of the condition, but if
she is discriminated against because of her past mental illness she is
still entitled to the protection afforded by the Act, as a person with a
past disability.
@@>
@@@ A17. A particular instance of someone who is treated under the Act as
having had a disability in the past is someone whose name was on the
register of disabled persons under provisions in the Disabled Persons
(Employment) Act 19446 on both 12 January 1995 and 2 December
1996. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 provided for such
people to be treated as having had a disability in the past, and those
provisions have been saved so that they still apply for the purposes of
the Equality Act 2010.
@@>
@@@ Section B: Substantial
This section should not be read in isolation but must be considered
together with sections A, C and D. Whether a person satisfies the
definition of a disabled person for the purposes of the Act will depend
upon the full circumstances of the case. That is, whether the adverse
effect of the person’s impairment on the carrying out of normal day-today activities is substantial and long term.
@@>
@@@ Meaning of ‘substantial adverse effect’B1.
The requirement that an adverse effect on normal day-today activities should be a substantial one reflects the general
understanding of disability as a limitation going beyond the normal
differences in ability which may exist among people. A substantial
effect is one that is more than a minor or trivial effect. This is stated
in the Act at S212(1). This section looks in more detail at what
‘substantial’ means. It should be read in conjunction with Section D
which considers what is meant by ‘normal day-to-day activities’.
@@>
@@@The time taken to carry out an activity B2.
The time taken by a person with an impairment to carry out a normal
day-to-day activity should be considered when assessing whether the
effect of that impairment is substantial. It should be compared with
the time it might take a person who did not have the impairment to
complete an activity.
A ten-year-old child has cerebral palsy. The effects include muscle
stiffness, poor balance and unco-ordinated movements. The child is
still able to do most things for himself, but he gets tired very easily
and it is harder for him to accomplish tasks like eating and drinking,
washing, and getting dressed. He has the ability to carry out everyday
activities such as these, but everything takes much longer compared
to a child of a similar age who does not have cerebral palsy. This
amounts to a substantial adverse effect.
@@>
@@@  The way in which an activity is carried out B3.
Another factor to be considered when assessing whether the effect
of an impairment is substantial is the way in which a person with that
impairment carries out a normal day-to-day activity. The comparison
should be with the way that the person might be expected to carry
out the activity compared with someone who does not have the
impairment.
A person who has obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) constantly
checks and rechecks that electrical appliances are switched off and
that the doors are locked when leaving home. A person without the
disorder would not normally carry out these frequent checks. The
need to constantly check and recheck has a substantial adverse
effect.
@@>
@@@ Cumulative effects of an impairment B4.
An impairment might not have a substantial adverse effect on a
person’s ability to undertake a particular day-to-day activity in
isolation. However, it is important to consider whether its effects on
more than one activity, when taken together, could result in an overall
substantial adverse effect.
@@>
@@@ B5. For example, a person whose impairment causes breathing difficulties
may, as a result, experience minor effects on the ability to carry out
a number of activities such as getting washed and dressed, going
for a walk or travelling on public transport. But taken together, the
cumulative result would amount to a substantial adverse effect on his
or her ability to carry out these normal day-to-day activities.
A man with depression experiences a range of symptoms that include
a loss of energy and motivation that makes even the simplest of
tasks or decisions seem quite difficult. He finds it difficult to get up
in the morning, get washed and dressed, and prepare breakfast. He is
forgetful and cannot plan ahead. As a result he has often run out of
food before he thinks of going shopping again. Household tasks are
frequently left undone, or take much longer to complete than normal.
Together, the effects amount to the impairment having a substantial
adverse effect on carrying out normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ B6.A person may have more than one impairment, any one of which
alone would not have a substantial effect. In such a case, account
should be taken of whether the impairments together have a
substantial effect overall on the person’s ability to carry out normal
day-to-day activities. For example, a minor impairment which affects
physical co-ordination and an irreversible but minor injury to a leg
which affects mobility, when taken together, might have a substantial
effect on the person’s ability to carry out certain normal day-to-day
activities. The cumulative effect of more than one impairment should
also be taken into account when determining whether the effect is
long-term, see Section C.
A person has mild learning disability. This means that his assimilation
of information is slightly slower than that of somebody without the
impairment. He also has a mild speech impairment that slightly
affects his ability to form certain words. Neither impairment on
its own has a substantial adverse effect, but the effects of the
impairments taken together have a substantial adverse effect on his
ability to converse.
@@>
@@@ Effects of behaviour B7.
Account should be taken of how far a person can reasonably be
expected to modify his or her behaviour, for example by use of a
coping or avoidance strategy, to prevent or reduce the effects of an
impairment on normal day-to-day activities. In some instances, a
coping or avoidance strategy might alter the effects of the impairment
to the extent that they are no longer substantial and the person
would no longer meet the definition of disability. In other instances,
even with the coping or avoidance strategy, there is still an adverse
effect on the carrying out of normal day-to-day activities.

For example, a person who needs to avoid certain substances because
of allergies may find the day-to-day activity of eating substantially
affected. Account should be taken of the degree to which a person
can reasonably be expected to behave in such a way that the
impairment ceases to have a substantial adverse effect on his or her
ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. (See also paragraph
B12.)
When considering modification of behaviour, it would be reasonable
to expect a person who has chronic back pain to avoid extreme
activities such as skiing. It would not be reasonable to expect the
person to give up, or modify, more normal activities that might
exacerbate the symptoms; such as shopping, or using public
transport.
@@>
@@@ B8. Similarly, it would be reasonable to expect a person with a phobia
to avoid extreme activities or situations that would aggravate their
condition. It would not be reasonable to expect him or her to give up,
or modify, normal activities that might exacerbate the symptoms.
A person with acrophobia (extreme fear of heights which can induce
panic attacks) might reasonably be expected to avoid the top of
extremely high buildings, such as the Eiffel Tower, but not to avoid all
multi-storey buildings.
@@>
@@@ B9. Account should also be taken of where a person avoids doing
things which, for example, cause pain, fatigue or substantial social
embarrassment, or avoids doing things because of a loss of energy
and motivation. It would not be reasonable to conclude that a person
who employed an avoidance strategy was not a disabled person. In
determining a question as to whether a person meets the definition
of disability it is important to consider the things that a person
cannot do, or can only do with difficulty.
In order to manage her mental health condition, a woman who
experiences panic attacks finds that she can manage daily tasks,
such as going to work, if she can avoid the stress of travelling in the
rush hour.
In determining whether she meets the definition of disability,
consideration should be given to the extent to which it is reasonable
to expect her to place such restrictions on her working and personal
life.
@@>
@@@ B10. In some cases, people have coping or avoidance strategies which
cease to work in certain circumstances (for example, where someone
who has dyslexia is placed under stress). If it is possible that a person’s
ability to manage the effects of an impairment will break down so
that effects will sometimes still occur, this possibility must be taken
into account when assessing the effects of the impairment.
			 ( See also paragraphs B12 to B17 (effects of treatment),
paragraphs C9 to C11 (likelihood of recurrence) and paragraph
D22 (indirect effects).)
@@>
@@@ Effects of environment B11.
Environmental conditions may exacerbate or lessen the effect of
an impairment. Factors such as temperature, humidity, lighting, the
time of day or night, how tired the person is, or how much stress he
or she is under, may have an impact on the effects. When assessing
whether adverse effects of an impairment are substantial, the extent
to which such environmental factors, individually or cumulatively,
are likely to have an impact on the effects should, therefore, also be
considered. The fact that an impairment may have a less substantial
effect in certain environments does not necessarily prevent it having
an overall substantial adverse effect on day-to-day activities. (See
also paragraphs C5 to C8, meaning of ‘long-term’ (recurring or
fluctuating effects).)
A woman has had rheumatoid arthritis for the last three years.
The effect on her ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities
fluctuates according to the weather conditions. The effects are
particularly bad during autumn and winter months when the weather
is cold and damp. Symptoms are mild during the summer months.
It is necessary to consider the overall impact of the arthritis, and
the extent to which it has a substantial adverse effect on her ability
to carry out day-to-day activities such as walking, undertaking
household tasks, and getting washed and dressed.
@@>
@@@ Effects of treatment B12. The Act provides that, where an impairment is subject to treatment
or correction, the impairment is to be treated as having a substantial
adverse effect if, but for the treatment or correction, the impairment is
likely to have that effect. In this context, ‘likely’ should be interpreted
as meaning ‘could well happen’. The practical effect of this provision
is that the impairment should be treated as having the effect that
it would have without the measures in question (Sch1, Para 5(1)).
The Act states that the treatment or correction measures which are
to be disregarded for these purposes include, in particular, medical
treatment and the use of a prosthesis or other aid (Sch1, Para 5(2)).
In this context, medical treatments would include treatments such
as counselling, the need to follow a particular diet, and therapies,
in addition to treatments with drugs. (See also paragraphs B7 and
B16.)
@@>
@@@ B13. This provision applies even if the measures result in the effects being
completely under control or not at all apparent. Where treatment is
continuing it may be having the effect of masking or ameliorating
a disability so that it does not have a substantial adverse effect. If
the final outcome of such treatment cannot be determined, or if it is
known that removal of the medical treatment would result in either a
relapse or a worsened condition, it would be reasonable to disregard
the medical treatment in accordance with paragraph 5 of Schedule 1.
@@>
@@@ B14. For example, if a person with a hearing impairment wears a hearing
aid the question as to whether his or her impairment has a substantial
adverse effect is to be decided by reference to what the hearing level
would be without the hearing aid. Similarly, in the case of someone
with diabetes which is being controlled by medication or diet should
be decided by reference to what the effects of the condition would be
if he or she were not taking that medication or following the required
diet.
A person with long-term depression is being treated by counselling.
The effect of the treatment is to enable the person to undertake
normal day-to-day activities, like shopping and going to work. If
the effect of the treatment is disregarded, the person’s impairment
would have a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ B15.

The Act states that this provision does not apply to sight impairments
to the extent that they are capable of correction by spectacles or
contact lenses. (Sch1, Para 5(3)). In other words, the only effects on
the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities which are to be
considered are those which remain when spectacles or contact lenses
are used (or would remain if they were used). This does not include
the use of devices to correct sight which are not spectacles or contact
lenses.
@@>
@@@ B16.
Account should be taken of where the effect of the continuing
medical treatment is to create a permanent improvement rather than
a temporary improvement. It is necessary to consider whether, as a
consequence of the treatment, the impairment would cease to have
a substantial adverse effect. For example, a person who develops
pneumonia may be admitted to hospital for treatment including a
course of antibiotics. This cures the impairment and no substantial
effects remain. (See also paragraph C11, regarding medical or
other treatment that permanently reduces or removes the effects
of an impairment.)
@@>
@@@ B17.
However, if a person receives treatment which cures a condition that
would otherwise meet the definition of a disability, the person would
be protected by the Act as a person who had a disability in the past.
(See paragraph A16.)
@@>
@@@ Progressive conditions B18.
Progressive conditions, which are conditions that have effects which
increase in severity over time, are subject to the special provisions
set out in Sch1, Para 8. These provisions provide that a person with
a progressive condition is to be regarded as having an impairment
which has a substantial adverse effect on his or her ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities before it actually has that effect.
@@>
@@@ B19. A person who has a progressive condition, will be treated as having an
impairment which has a substantial adverse effect from the moment
any impairment resulting from that condition first has some adverse
effect on his or her ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities,
provided that in the future the adverse effect is likely to become
substantial. Medical prognosis of the likely impact of the condition will
be the normal route to establishing protection under this provision.
The effect need not be continuous and need not be substantial. (See
also paragraphs C5 to C8 on recurring or fluctuating effects). The
person will still need to show that the impairment meets the longterm condition of the definition. (Sch1, Para 2)
@@>
@@@ B20.
Examples of progressive conditions to which the special provisions
apply include systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE), various types
of dementia, and motor neurone disease. This list, however, is not
exhaustive.
A young boy aged 8 has been experiencing muscle cramps and some
weakness. The effects are quite minor at present, but he has been
diagnosed as having muscular dystrophy. Eventually it is expected
that the resulting muscle weakness will cause substantial adverse
effects on his ability to walk, run and climb stairs. Although there
is no substantial adverse effect at present, muscular dystrophy is
a progressive condition, and this child will still be entitled to the
protection of the Act under the special provisions in Sch1, Para 8
of the Act if it can be shown that the effects are likely to become
substantial.
A woman has been diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosis
(SLE) following complaints to her GP that she is experiencing mild
aches and pains in her joints. She has also been feeling generally
unwell, with some flu-like symptoms. The initial symptoms do not
have a substantial adverse effect on her ability to carry out normal
day-to-day activities. However, SLE is a progressive condition, with
fluctuating effects. She has been advised that the condition may
come and go over many years, and in the future the effects may
become substantial, including severe joint pain, inflammation,
stiffness, and skin rashes. Providing it can be shown that the effects
are likely to become substantial, she will be covered by the special
provisions relating to progressive conditions. She will also need
to meet the ‘long-term’ condition of the definition in order to be
protected by the Act.
@@>
@@@ B21. The Act provides for a person with one of the progressive conditions
of cancer, HIV and multiple sclerosis to be a disabled person from the
point at which they have that condition, so effectively from diagnosis.
(See paragraph A9.)
@@>
@@@ B22.
As set out in paragraph B19, in order for the special provisions covering
progressive conditions to apply, there only needs to be some adverse
effect on the person’s ability to carry out normal day to day activities.
It does not have to be a substantial adverse effect. If a person with a
progressive condition is successfully treated (for example by surgery)
so that there are no longer any adverse effects, the special provisions
will not apply. However, if the treatment does not remove all adverse
effects the provisions will still apply. In addition, where the treatment
manages to treat the original condition but leads to other adverse
effects the provisions may still apply.
A man has an operation to remove the colon because of progressing
and uncontrollable ulcerative colitis. The operation results in his no
longer experiencing adverse effects from the colitis. He requires a
colostomy, however, which means that his bowel actions can only be
controlled by a sanitary appliance.
This requirement for an appliance substantially affects his ability
to undertake a normal day-to-day activity and should be taken into
account as an adverse effect arising from the original impairment.
@@>
@@@ B23.
Whether the effects of any treatment can qualify for the purposes
of Sch1, Para 8, which provides that a person with a progressive
condition is to be regarded as having an impairment that has a
substantial adverse effect on his or her ability to carry out normal dayto-day activities, will depend on the circumstances of the individual
case.
@@>
@@@ Severe disfigurements B24.
The Act provides that where an impairment consists of a severe
disfigurement, it is to be treated as having a substantial adverse effect
on the person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. There
is no need to demonstrate such an effect (Sch1, Para 3).
A lady has significant scarring to her face as a result of a bonfire
accident. The woman uses skin camouflage to cover the scars as she
is very self conscious about her appearance. She avoids large crowds
and bright lights including public transport and supermarkets and
she does not socialise with people outside her family in case they
notice the mark and ask her questions about it.
This amounts to a substantial adverse effect. However, the Act
does not require her to show that her disfigurement has this effect
because it provides for a severe disfigurement to be treated as
having a substantial adverse effect on the person’s ability to carry
out normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ B25.
Examples of disfigurements include scars, birthmarks, limb or postural
deformation (including restricted bodily development), or diseases of
the skin. Assessing severity will be mainly a matter of the degree of
the disfigurement which may involve taking into account factors such
as the nature, size, and prominence of the disfigurement. However,
it may be necessary to take account of where the disfigurement in
question is (e.g. on the back as opposed to the face).
@@>
@@@ B26. Regulations provide that a disfigurement which consists of a tattoo
(which has not been removed) is not to be considered as a severe
disfigurement. Also excluded is a piercing of the body for decorative
purposes including anything attached through the piercing7.
@@>
@@@ Section C: Long-term
This section should not be read in isolation but must be considered
together with sections A, C and D. Whether a person satisfies the
definition of a disabled person for the purposes of the Act will depend
upon the full circumstances of the case. That is, whether the adverse
effect of the person’s impairment on the carrying out of normal day-today activities is substantial and long term.
@@>
@@@ Meaning of ‘long-term effects’ C1.
The Act states that, for the purpose of deciding whether a person is
disabled, a long-term effect of an impairment is one:
•	 which has lasted at least 12 months; or
•	 where the total period for which it lasts, from the time of the first
onset, is likely to be at least 12 months; or
•	 which is likely to last for the rest of the life of the person affected
(Sch1, Para 2).
Special provisions apply when determining whether the effects of an
impairment that has fluctuating or recurring effects are long-term.
(See paragraphs C5 to C11). Also a person who is deemed to be a
disabled person does not need to satisfy the long-term requirement.
(See paragraphs A9 to A10.)
@@>
@@@ C2.
The cumulative effect of related impairments should be taken into
account when determining whether the person has experienced
a long-term effect for the purposes of meeting the definition of
a disabled person. The substantial adverse effect of an impairment
which has developed from, or is likely to develop from, another
impairment should be taken into account when determining whether
the effect has lasted, or is likely to last at least twelve months, or for
the rest of the life of the person affected.

A man experienced an anxiety disorder. This had a substantial
adverse effect on his ability to make social contacts and to visit
particular places. The disorder lasted for eight months and then
developed into depression, which had the effect that he was no
longer able to leave his home or go to work. The depression continued
for five months. As the total period over which the adverse effects
lasted was in excess of 12 months, the long-term element of the
definition of disability was met.

A person experiences, over a long period, adverse effects arising from
two separate and unrelated conditions, for example a lung infection
and a leg injury. These effects should not be aggregated.
@@>
@@@ Meaning of ‘likely’ C3.		 The meaning of ‘likely’ is relevant when determining:
•	 whether an impairment has a long-term effect (Sch1, Para 2(1),
see also paragraph C1);
•	 whether an impairment has a recurring effect (Sch1, Para 2(2), see
also paragraphs C5 to C11);
•	 whether adverse effects of a progressive condition will become
substantial (Sch1, Para 8, see also paragraphs B18 to B23); or
•	 how an impairment should be treated for the purposes of the Act
when the effects of that impairment are controlled or corrected by
treatment or behaviour (Sch1, Para 5(1), see also paragraphs B7
to B17).
In these contexts, ‘likely’, should be interpreted as meaning that it
could well happen.
@@>
@@@ C4. In assessing the likelihood of an effect lasting for 12 months, account
should be taken of the circumstances at the time the alleged
discrimination took place. Anything which occurs after that time will
not be relevant in assessing this likelihood. Account should also be
taken of both the typical length of such an effect on an individual, and
any relevant factors specific to this individual (for example, general
state of health or age).
@@>
@@@ Recurring or fluctuating effects C5.
The Act states that, if an impairment has had a substantial adverse
effect on a person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities
but that effect ceases, the substantial effect is treated as continuing
if it is likely to recur. (In deciding whether a person has had a disability
in the past, the question is whether a substantial adverse effect has
in fact recurred.) Conditions with effects which recur only sporadically
or for short periods can still qualify as impairments for the purposes of
the Act, in respect of the meaning of ‘long-term’ (Sch1, Para 2(2), see
also paragraphs C3 to C4 (meaning of likely).)
@@>
@@@ C6. For example, a person with rheumatoid arthritis may experience
substantial adverse effects for a few weeks after the first occurrence
and then have a period of remission. See also example at paragraph
B11. If the substantial adverse effects are likely to recur, they are
to be treated as if they were continuing. If the effects are likely to
recur beyond 12 months after the first occurrence, they are to be
treated as long-term. Other impairments with effects which can
recur beyond 12 months, or where effects can be sporadic, include
Menières Disease and epilepsy as well as mental health conditions
such as schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, and certain types of
depression, though this is not an exhaustive list. Some impairments
with recurring or fluctuating effects may be less obvious in their
impact on the individual concerned than is the case with other
impairments where the effects are more constant.

A young man has bipolar affective disorder, a recurring form of
depression. The first episode occurred in months one and two of a
13-month period. The second episode took place in month 13. This
man will satisfy the requirements of the definition in respect of the
meaning of long-term, because the adverse effects have recurred
beyond 12 months after the first occurrence and are therefore
treated as having continued for the whole period (in this case, a
period of 13 months).

In contrast, a woman has two discrete episodes of depression within
a ten-month period. In month one she loses her job and has a period
of depression lasting six weeks. In month nine she experiences a
bereavement and has a further episode of depression lasting eight
weeks. Even though she has experienced two episodes of depression
she will not be covered by the Act. This is because, as at this stage,
the effects of her impairment have not yet lasted more than 12
months after the first occurrence, and there is no evidence that these
episodes are part of an underlying condition of depression which is
likely to recur beyond the 12-month period.
However, if there was evidence to show that the two episodes did
arise from an underlying condition of depression, the effects of which
are likely to recur beyond the 12-month period, she would satisfy the
long term requirement.
@@>
@@@ C7.
It is not necessary for the effect to be the same throughout the period
which is being considered in relation to determining whether the
‘long-term’ element of the definition is met. A person may still satisfy
the long-term element of the definition even if the effect is not the
same throughout the period. It may change: for example activities
which are initially very difficult may become possible to a much
greater extent. The effect might even disappear temporarily. Or other
effects on the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities may
develop and the initial effect may disappear altogether.
A person has Menières Disease. This results in his experiencing
mild tinnitus at times, which does not adversely affect his ability
to carry out normal day-to-day activities. However, it also causes
temporary periods of significant hearing loss every few months.
The hearing loss substantially and adversely affects his ability to
conduct conversations or listen to the radio or television. Although
his condition does not continually have this adverse effect, it satisfies
the long-term requirement because it has substantial adverse effects
that are likely to recur beyond 12 months after he developed the
impairment.
@@>
@@@ C8. Regulations specifically exclude seasonal allergic rhinitis (e.g. hayfever)
except where it aggravates the effects of an existing condition8.
For example, this may occur in some cases of asthma. (See also
paragraphs A12 to A15 (exclusions).)
@@>
@@@ Likelihood of recurrence C9.
Likelihood of recurrence should be considered taking all the
circumstances of the case into account. This should include what the
person could reasonably be expected to do to prevent the recurrence.
For example, the person might reasonably be expected to take action
which prevents the impairment from having such effects (e.g. avoiding
substances to which he or she is allergic). This may be unreasonably
difficult with some substances.
@@>
@@@ C10. In addition, it is possible that the way in which a person can control or
cope with the effects of an impairment may not always be successful.
For example, this may be because an avoidance routine is difficult to
adhere to, or itself adversely affects the ability to carry out day-to-day
activities, or because the person is in an unfamiliar environment. If
there is an increased likelihood that the control will break down, it will
be more likely that there will be a recurrence. That possibility should
be taken into account when assessing the likelihood of a recurrence.
(See also paragraphs B7 to B10 (effects of behaviour), paragraph
B11 (environmental effects); paragraphs B12 to B17 (effect of
treatment); and paragraphs C3 to C4 (meaning of likely).)
@@>
@@@ C11.  If medical or other treatment is likely to permanently cure a condition
and therefore remove the impairment, so that recurrence of its effects
would then be unlikely even if there were no further treatment, this
should be taken into consideration when looking at the likelihood of
recurrence of those effects. However, if the treatment simply delays
or prevents a recurrence, and a recurrence would be likely if the
treatment stopped, as is the case with most medication, then the
treatment is to be ignored and the effect is to be regarded as likely to
recur.
@@>
@@@ Assessing whether a past disability was long-term C12.
The Act provides that a person who has had a disability within the
definition is protected from some forms of discrimination even if
he or she has since recovered or the effects have become less than
substantial. In deciding whether a past condition was a disability, its
effects count as long-term if they lasted 12 months or more after
the first occurrence, or if a recurrence happened or continued until
more than 12 months after the first occurrence (S6(4) and Sch1, Para
2). For the forms of discrimination covered by this provision see
paragraph A16.
A person was diagnosed with a digestive condition that significantly
restricted her ability to eat. She received medical treatment for the
condition for over a year, but eventually required surgery which cured
the condition. As the effects of the condition had lasted for over 12
months, and they had a substantial adverse effect on her ability to
carry out a normal day-to-day activity, the condition met the Act’s
definition of a disability.
The woman is entitled to the protection of the Act as a person who
has had a past disability.
@@>
@@@ Section D: Normal day-to-day
activities
This section should not be read in isolation but must be considered
together with sections A, B and C. Whether a person satisfies the
definition of a disabled person for the purposes of the Act will depend
upon the full circumstances of the case. That is, whether the adverse
effect of the person’s impairment on the carrying out of normal day-today activities is substantial and long term.
D1.
The Act looks at a person’s impairment and whether it substantially
and adversely affects the person’s ability to carry out normal day-today activities.
@@>
@@@ Meaning of ‘normal day-to-day activities’
@@>
@@@D2.		 The Act does not define what is to be regarded as a ‘normal dayto-day activity’. It is not possible to provide an exhaustive list of dayto-day activities, although guidance on this matter is given here and
illustrative examples of when it would, and would not, be reasonable
to regard an impairment as having a substantial adverse effect on
the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities are shown in the
Appendix.
@@>
@@@ D3. In general, day-to-day activities are things people do on a regular
or daily basis, and examples include shopping, reading and writing,
having a conversation or using the telephone, watching television,
getting washed and dressed, preparing and eating food, carrying out
household tasks, walking and travelling by various forms of transport,
and taking part in social activities. Normal day-to-day activities can
include general work-related activities, and study and educationrelated activities, such as interacting with colleagues, following
instructions, using a computer, driving, carrying out interviews,
preparing written documents, and keeping to a timetable or a shift
pattern. A person works in a small retail store. His duties include maintaining
stock in a stock room, dealing with customers and suppliers in person
and by telephone, and closing the store at the end of the day. Each of
these elements of the job would be regarded as a normal day-to-day
activity, which could be adversely affected by an impairment.
@@>
@@@ D4. The term ‘normal day-to-day activities’ is not intended to include
activities which are normal only for a particular person, or a small
group of people. In deciding whether an activity is a normal day-today activity, account should be taken of how far it is carried out by
people on a daily or frequent basis. In this context, ‘normal’ should be
given its ordinary, everyday meaning.
@@>
@@@ D5. A normal day-to-day activity is not necessarily one that is carried out
by a majority of people. For example, it is possible that some activities
might be carried out only, or more predominantly, by people of a
particular gender, such as breast-feeding or applying make-up, and
cannot therefore be said to be normal for most people. They would
nevertheless be considered to be normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ D6. Also, whether an activity is a normal day-to-day activity should not
be determined by whether it is more normal for it to be carried out at
a particular time of day. For example, getting out of bed and getting
dressed are activities that are normally associated with the morning.
They may be carried out much later in the day by workers who work
night shifts, but they would still be considered to be normal day-today activities.
@@>
@@@ D7. In considering the ability of a child aged six or over to carry out a
normal day-to-day activity, it is necessary to take account of the level
of achievement which would be normal for a person of a similar age.
(See also Section E (Disabled children).)
@@>
@@@ Specialised activities D8.
Where activities are themselves highly specialised or involve highly
specialised levels of attainment, they would not be regarded as
normal day-to-day activities for most people. In some instances workrelated activities are so highly specialised that they would not be
regarded as normal day-to-day activities.
A watch repairer carries out delicate work with highly specialised
tools. He develops tenosynovitis. This restricts his ability to carry out
delicate work though he is able to carry out activities such as general
household repairs using more substantial tools.
Although the delicate work is a normal working activity for a person
in his profession, it would not be regarded as a normal day-to-day
activity for most people.
@@>
@@@ D9.The same is true of other specialised activities such as playing a
musical instrument to a high standard of achievement; taking part
in activities where very specific skills or level of ability are required;
or playing a particular sport to a high level of ability, such as would
be required for a professional footballer or athlete. Where activities
involve highly specialised skills or levels of attainment, they would not
be regarded as normal day-to-day activities for most people.
A woman plays the piano to a high standard, and often takes part in
public performances. She has developed carpal tunnel syndrome in
her wrists. This does not prevent her from playing the piano, but she
cannot achieve such a high standard.
This restriction would not be an adverse effect on a normal day-today activity, because playing the piano to such a specialised level
would not be normal for most people.
@@>
@@@ D10.	However, many types of specialised work-related or other activities
may still involve normal day-to-day activities which can be adversely
affected by an impairment. For example they may involve normal
activities such as: sitting down, standing up, walking, running,
verbal interaction, writing, driving; using everyday objects such as
a computer keyboard or a mobile phone, and lifting, or carrying
everyday objects, such as a vacuum cleaner.
The work of the watch repairer referred to above also includes
preparing invoices and counting and recording daily takings. These
are normal day-to-day activities. The effects of his tenosynovitis
increase in severity over time resulting in greater restriction of
movement in his hands. As a consequence he experiences substantial
difficulties carrying out these normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ Adverse effects on the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities
@@>
@@@ D11.	This section provides guidance on what should be taken into account
in deciding whether a person’s ability to carry out normal day-today activities might be restricted by the effects of that person’s
impairment. The examples given are purely illustrative and should not
in any way be considered as a prescriptive or exhaustive list.
@@>
@@@ D12.	In the Appendix, examples are given of circumstances where it would
be reasonable to regard the adverse effect on the ability to carry out
a normal day-to-day activity as substantial. In addition, examples are
given of circumstances where it would not be reasonable to regard
the effect as substantial. In these examples, the effect described
should be thought of as if it were the only effect of the impairment.
@@>
@@@ D13.	The examples of what it would, and what it would not, be reasonable
to regard as substantial adverse effects on normal day-to-day
activities are indicators and not tests. They do not mean that if a
person can do an activity listed then he or she does not experience
any substantial adverse effects: the person may be affected in relation
to other activities, and this instead may indicate a substantial effect.
Alternatively, the person may be affected in a minor way in a number
of different activities, and the cumulative effect could amount
to a substantial adverse effect. (See also paragraphs B4 to B6
(cumulative effects).)
@@>
@@@ D14.	The examples in this section describe the effect which would occur
when the various factors described in Sections A, B and C have been
allowed for, including for example disregarding the impact of medical
or other treatment.
@@>
@@@ D15.	Some of the examples in this section show how an adverse effect
may arise from either a physical or a mental impairment. Where
illustrations of both types of impairment have not been given, this
does not mean that only one type of impairment could result in that
particular effect. Physical impairments can result in mental effects
and mental impairments can have physical manifestations.

•	 A person with a physical impairment may, because of pain or

fatigue, experience difficulties in carrying out normal activities that
involve mental processes.

A journalist has recurrent severe migraines which cause her
significant pain. Owing to the pain, she has difficulty maintaining
concentration on writing articles and meeting deadlines.

•	 A person with a mental impairment or learning disability may
experience difficulty in carrying out normal day-to-day activities
that involve physical activity. A young man with severe anxiety and symptoms of agoraphobia is
unable to go out more than a few times a month. This is because
he fears being outside in open spaces and gets panic attacks which
mean that he cannot remain in places like theatres and restaurants
once they become crowded. This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities such as social activities.

A woman has Downs Syndrome and is only able to understand her
familiar local bus route. This means that she is unable to travel
unaccompanied on other routes, because she gets lost and cannot
find her way home without assistance.
This has a substantial adverse effect on her ability to carry out the
normal day-to-day activity of using public transport.
@@>
@@@ D16.	Normal day-to-day activities also include activities that are required
to maintain personal well-being or to ensure personal safety, or
the safety of other people. Account should be taken of whether the
effects of an impairment have an impact on whether the person
is inclined to carry out or neglect basic functions such as eating,
drinking, sleeping, keeping warm or personal hygiene; or to exhibit
behaviour which puts the person or other people at risk.
A woman has had anorexia, an eating disorder, for two years and the
effects of her impairment restrict her ability to carry out the normal
day-to-day activity of eating.

A man has had paranoid schizophrenia for five years. One of the
effects of this impairment is an inability to make proper judgements
about activities that may result in a risk to his personal safety. For
example, he will walk into roads without checking if cars are coming.
This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out the
normal day-to-day activity of crossing the road safely.
@@>
@@@ D17.	Some impairments may have an adverse impact on the ability of a
person to carry out normal day-to-day communication activities. For
example, they may adversely affect whether a person is able to speak
clearly at a normal pace and rhythm and to understand someone else
speaking normally in the person’s native language. Some impairments
can have an adverse effect on a person’s ability to understand human
non-factual information and non-verbal communication such as body
language and facial expressions. Account should be taken of how such
factors can have an adverse effect on normal day-to-day activities.

A six-year-old boy has verbal dyspraxia which adversely affects his
ability to speak and make himself clear to other people, including his
friends and teachers at school.
A woman has bipolar disorder. Her speech sometimes becomes overexcited and irrational, making it difficult for others to understand
what she is saying.
A man has had a stammer since childhood. He does not stammer
all the time, but his stammer, particularly in telephone calls, goes
beyond the occasional lapses in fluency found in the speech of
people who do not have the impairment. However, this effect can
often be hidden by his avoidance strategies. He tries to avoid making
or taking telephone calls where he believes he will stammer, or he
does not speak as much during the calls. He sometimes tries to avoid
stammering by substituting words, or by inserting extra words or
phrases.
In these cases there are substantial adverse effects on the person’s
ability to carry out normal day-to-day communication activities.

A man has Asperger’s syndrome, a form of autism. He finds it hard to
understand non-verbal communications such as facial expressions,
and non-factual communication such as jokes. He takes everything
that is said very literally. He is given verbal instructions during office
banter with his manager, but his ability to understand the instruction
is impaired because he is unable to isolate the instruction from the
social conversation.
This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day communication.
@@>
@@@ D18. A person’s impairment may have an adverse effect on day-to- day
activities that require an ability to co-ordinate their movements, to
carry everyday objects such as a kettle of water, a bag of shopping, a
briefcase, or an overnight bag, or to use standard items of equipment.
A young man who has dyspraxia experiences a range of effects which
include difficulty co-ordinating physical movements. He is frequently
knocking over cups and bottles of drink and cannot combine two
activities at the same time, such as walking while holding a plate of
food upright, without spilling the food.
This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities such as making a drink and eating.

A man with achondroplasia has unusually short stature, and arms
which are disproportionate in size to the rest of his body. He has
difficulty lifting everyday items like a vacuum cleaner, and he cannot
reach a standard height sink or washbasin without a step to stand on.
This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities, such as cleaning, washing up and
washing his hands.
D19.	A person’s impairment may adversely affect the ability to carry
out normal day-to-day activities that involve aspects such as
remembering to do things, organising their thoughts, planning
a course of action and carrying it out, taking in new knowledge,
and understanding spoken or written information. This includes
considering whether the person has cognitive difficulties or learns to
do things significantly more slowly than a person who does not have
an impairment.

A woman with bipolar affective disorder is easily distracted. This
results in her frequently not being able to concentrate on performing
an activity like making a sandwich or filling in a form without being
constantly distracted from the task. Consequently, it takes her
significantly longer than a person without the disorder to complete
these types of task.
Therefore there is a substantial adverse effect on normal day-to-day
activities.
@@>
@@@ Environmental effects D20.
Environmental conditions may have an impact on how an impairment
affects a person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.
Consideration should be given to the level and nature of any
environmental effect. Account should be taken of whether it is within
such a range and of such a type that most people would be able to
carry out an activity without an adverse effect. For example, whether
background noise or lighting is of a type or level that would enable
most people to hear or see adequately. (See also paragraph B11.)
A woman has tinnitus which makes it difficult for her to hear or
understand normal conversations. She cannot hear and respond to
what a supermarket checkout assistant is saying if the two people
behind her in the queue are holding a conversation at the same time.
This has a substantial adverse effect on her ability to carry out the
normal day-to-day activity of taking part in a conversation.

A man has retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a hereditary eye disorder which
affects the retina. The man has difficulty seeing in poor light and
experiences a marked reduction in his field of vision (referred to as
tunnel vision). As a result he often bumps into furniture and doors
when he is in an unfamiliar environment, and can only read when he
is in a very well-lit area.
This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities such as socialising in a cinema or lowlylit restaurant.
D21.	Consideration should be given to whether there may also be an
adverse effect on the ability to carry out a normal day-to-day activity
outside of that particular environment.
A man works in a factory where chemical fumes cause him to have
breathing difficulties. He is diagnosed with occupational asthma. This
has a substantial adverse effect while he is at work, because he is no
longer able to work where he would be exposed to the fumes.
Even in a non-work situation he finds any general exertion difficult.
This has some adverse effect on his ability to carry out a normal dayto-day activity like changing a bed.
Although the substantial effect is only apparent while he is at work,
where he is exposed to fumes, the man is able to demonstrate that
his impairment has an adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ Indirect effects D22.
An impairment may not directly prevent someone from carrying
out one or more normal day-to-day activities, but it may still have
a substantial adverse effect on how the person carries out those
activities. For example:

•	 pain or fatigue: where an impairment causes pain or fatigue, the

person may have the ability to carry out a normal day-to-day
activity, but may be restricted in the way that it is carried out
because of experiencing pain in doing so. Or the impairment might
make the activity more than usually fatiguing so that the person
might not be able to repeat the task over a sustained period of time.
(See also paragraphs B7 to B10 (effects of behaviour));

A man with osteoarthritis experiences significant pain in his hands
undertaking tasks such as using a keyboard at home or work, peeling
vegetables, opening jars and writing.
The impairment substantially adversely affects the man’s ability to
carry out normal day-to-day activities.

A man has had chronic fatigue syndrome for several years. Although
he has the physical capability to walk and to stand, he finds these
very difficult to sustain for any length of time because he experiences
overwhelming fatigue. As a consequence, he is restricted in his ability
to take part in normal day-to-day activities such as travelling, so he
avoids going out socially, and works from home several days a week.
Therefore there is a substantial adverse effect on normal day-to-day
activities.

•	 medical advice: where a person has been advised by a medical

practitioner or other health professional, as part of a treatment
plan, to change, limit or refrain from a normal day-to-day activity
on account of an impairment or only do it in a certain way or under
certain conditions. (See also paragraphs B12 to B17 (effects of
treatment).)

A woman who works as a teacher develops sciatic pain which is
attributed to a prolapsed inter-vertebral disc. Despite physiotherapy
and traction her pain became worse. As part of her treatment plan
her doctor prescribes daily pain relief medication and advises her to
avoid carrying moderately heavy items or standing for more than a
few minutes at a time.
This has a substantial adverse effect on her carrying out a range of
normal day-to-day activities such as shopping or standing to address
her pupils for a whole lesson.

•	 frequency: some impairments may require the person to undertake

certain activities, or functions at such frequent intervals that they
adversely affect the ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.

A young woman is a sales representative. She has developed colitis,
an inflammatory bowel disease. The condition is a chronic one which
is subject to periods of remission and flare-ups. During a flare-up
she experiences severe abdominal pain and bouts of diarrhoea. This
makes it very difficult for her to drive, including for the purposes of
her job, as she must ensure she is always close to a lavatory.
This has a substantial adverse effect on her ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities.
@@>
@@@ Effect of treatment or correction measures D23.
Except as explained below, where a person is receiving treatment or
correction measures for an impairment, the effect of the impairment
on day-to-day activities is to be taken as that which the person would
experience without the treatment or measures. (See also paragraphs
B12 to B17.)
A man has a hearing impairment which has the effect that he cannot
hold a conversation with another person even in a quiet environment.
He has a hearing aid which overcomes that effect. However, it is the
effect of the impairment without the hearing aid that needs to be
considered.
In this case, the impairment has a substantial adverse effect on the
day-to-day activity of holding a conversation.
D24.	If a person’s sight is corrected by spectacles or contact lenses, or
could be corrected by them, what needs to be considered is any
adverse effect that the visual impairment has on the ability to carry
out normal day-to-day activities which remains while the person is
wearing spectacles or lenses.
@@>
@@@ Section E: Disabled children
@@>
@@@ E1.
The effects of impairments may not be apparent in babies and young
children because they are too young to have developed the ability
to carry out activities that are normal for older children and adults.
Regulations provide that an impairment to a child under six years old
is to be treated as having a substantial and long-term adverse effect
on the ability of that child to carry out normal day-to-day activities
where it would normally have a substantial and long-term adverse
effect on the ability of a person aged six years or over to carry out
normal day-to-day activities9.
A six month old girl has an impairment that results in her having
no movement in her legs. She is not yet at the stage of crawling or
walking. So far the impairment does not have an apparent effect on
her ability to move around. However, the impairment is to be treated
as having a substantial and long-term adverse effect on her ability
to carry out a normal day-to-day activity like going for a walk. This is
because it would normally have such an adverse effect on the ability
of a person aged six years or over to carry out normal day-to-day
activities.
@@>
@@@ E2.
Children aged six and older are subject to the normal requirements of
the definition. That is, that they must have an impairment which has
a substantial and long-term adverse effect on their ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities. However, in considering the ability of a
child aged six or over to carry out a normal day-to-day activity, it is
necessary to take account of the level of achievement which would be
normal for a person of a similar age.

A six-year-old child has been diagnosed as having autism. He has
difficulty communicating through speech and in recognising when
someone is happy or sad. When going somewhere new or taking a
different route he can become very anxious. Each of these factors
amounts to a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry out
normal day-to-day activities, such as holding a conversation or
enjoying a day trip, even for such a young child.
@@>
@@@ E3.
Part 6 of the Act provides protection for disabled pupils and students
by preventing discrimination against them at school or in post-16
education because of, or for a reason related to, their disability. A pupil
or student must satisfy the definition of disability as described in this
guidance in order to be protected by Part 6 of the Act. The duties for
schools in the Act, including the duty for schools to make reasonable
adjustments for disabled children, are designed to dovetail with duties
under the Special Educational Needs (SEN) framework which are
based on a separate definition of special educational needs. Further
information on these duties can be found in the SEN Code of Practice
and the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s Codes of Practice for
Education.

Examples of children in an educational setting where their
impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on the
ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities:
A 10-year-old girl has a learning disability. She has a short attention
span and has difficulty remembering facts from one day to the next.
She can read only a few familiar words. Each of these factors has a
substantial adverse effect on her ability to participate in learning
activities.
A 14-year-old boy has been diagnosed as having attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). He often finds it difficult to
concentrate and skips from task to task forgetting instructions.
Either of these factors has a substantial adverse effect on his ability
to participate in class and join in team games in the playground.
A 12-year-old boy has cerebral palsy and has limited movement in
his legs. This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to move
around the school and take part in physical sports activities.
@@>
@@@ Section F: Disability asna particular protected or as a shared protected characteristic
@@>
@@@ F1.
The Act provides protection from discrimination based on a range
of protected characteristics and disability, as defined in the Act and
related, is a protected characteristic.
@@>
@@@ F2.
Certain provisions in the Act apply where a person has a “particular”
protected characteristic. In the case of disability, the Act states that
a reference to a person with a particular protected characteristic is a
reference to a person who has a particular disability (S6(3)).
A disabled man has a mobility impairment. This has a substantial and
long-term adverse effect on his ability to carry out normal day-today activities like shopping and gardening. Therefore he is protected
by the Act in general because he has the protected characteristic of
disability.
However, for the purposes of the provisions of the Act that apply
specifically to people with a particular protected characteristic, he
would have the particular characteristic of being mobility impaired.
@@>
@@@ F3.
Some provisions in the Act apply where persons share a protected
characteristic. In the case of disability, the Act states that a reference
to persons who share a particular characteristic is a reference to
persons who have the same disability (S6(3)).

For the purposes of the provisions that apply specifically to people
who share a protected characteristic, the disabled man would share
the protected characteristic with other people who have mobility
impairments.
@@>
@@@ F4. This may be illustrated by reference to the following provisions in the Act.
•	 Schedule 9 paragraph 1 of the Act provides that it is not
discrimination, under a range of work provisions, for it to be an
occupational requirement that the job holder has a particular
protected characteristic.

  A charitable organisation that provides services to people with HIV
  and Aids has vacancies for counsellors for which being HIV positive is
  an occupational requirement.

It is not discriminatory for the organisation to only appoint people
who have a particular protected characteristic which, in this instance,
is having the particular disability of being HIV positive.

•	Schedule 16 paragraph 1 relating to associations or clubs for people
who have a single protected characteristic, apply where persons
share a protected characteristic.

A group of people with hearing impairments form a private club that
provides advice, support and recreational activities specifically for
people who have that particular impairment.
For the purposes of the Act, a reference to people who share a
protected characteristic would, in this instance, be to people who
have hearing impairments.
@@>
@@@ Appendix an illustrative and non-exhaustive list of factors which, if they are experienced by a person, it would be reasonable to regard as having a substantial adverse effect on normal day-to-day activities.
Whether a person satisfies the definition of a disabled person for the
purposes of the Act will depend upon the full circumstances of the case. That
is, whether the substantial adverse effect of the impairment on normal dayto-day activities is long term.
In the following examples, the effect described should be thought of as if it
were the only effect of the impairment.

•	 Difficulty in getting dressed, for example, because of physical restrictions, a
lack of understanding of the concept, or low motivation;

•	 Difficulty carrying out activities associated with toileting, or caused by
frequent minor incontinence;

•	 Difficulty preparing a meal, for example, because of restricted ability to do

things like open cans or packages, or because of an inability to understand
and follow a simple recipe;

•	 Difficulty eating; for example, because of an inability to co-ordinate the
use of a knife and fork, a need for assistance, or the effect of an eating
disorder;

•	 Difficulty going out of doors unaccompanied, for example, because the
person has a phobia, a physical restriction, or a learning disability;

•	 Difficulty waiting or queuing, for example, because of a lack of

understanding of the concept, or because of pain or fatigue when standing
for prolonged periods;

•	 Difficulty using transport; for example, because of physical restrictions,

pain or fatigue, a frequent need for a lavatory or as a result of a mental
impairment or learning disability;

•	 Difficulty in going up or down steps, stairs or gradients; for example,

because movements are painful, fatiguing or restricted in some way;

•	 A total inability to walk, or an ability to walk only a short distance without
difficulty; for example because of physical restrictions, pain or fatigue;

•	 Difficulty entering or staying in environments that the person perceives as
strange or frightening;

•	 Behaviour which challenges people around the person, making it difficult
for the person to be accepted in public places;

•	 Persistent difficulty crossing a road safely, for example, because of physical
restrictions or a failure to understand and manage the risk;

•	 Persistent general low motivation or loss of interest in everyday activities;
•	 Difficulty accessing and moving around buildings; for example because of
inability to open doors, grip handrails on steps or gradients, or an inability
to follow directions;

•	 Difficulty operating a computer, for example, because of physical

restrictions in using a keyboard, a visual impairment or a learning disability;

•	 Difficulty picking up and carrying objects of moderate weight, such as a
bag of shopping or a small piece of luggage, with one hand;

•	 Inability to converse, or give instructions orally, in the person’s native
spoken language;

•	 Difficulty understanding or following simple verbal instructions;
•	 Difficulty hearing and understanding another person speaking clearly
over the voice telephone (where the telephone is not affected by bad
reception);

•	 Persistent and significant difficulty in reading or understanding written

material where this is in the person’s native written language, for example
because of a mental impairment, or learning disability, or a visual
impairment (except where that is corrected by glasses or contact lenses);

•	 Intermittent loss of consciousness;
•	 Frequent confused behaviour, intrusive thoughts, feelings of being
controlled, or delusions;

•	 Persistently wanting to avoid people or significant difficulty taking part

in normal social interaction or forming social relationships, for example
because of a mental health condition or disorder;

•	 Persistent difficulty in recognising, or remembering the names of, familiar
people such as family or friends;
@@>
@@@ Notes
1	Schedule 1, Para 12 defines an ‘adjudicating body’ as a court, tribunal,
or a person (other than a court or tribunal) who may decide a claim
relating to a contravention of Part 6 (education).
2	Regulation 7 of The Equality Act 2010 (Disability) Regulations 2010 (S.I.
2010/2128).The Equality Act 2010 (Disability) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/2128).

4	Provisions in The Equality Act 2010 (Disability) Regulations 2010 (S.I.
2010/2128).Covering: taxis etc; public service vehicles and rail transport.

6	The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 (DDA) provided that any individual
who was registered as a disabled person under the Disabled Persons
(Employment) Act 1944 and whose name appeared on the register
both on 12 January 1995 and 2 December 1996 was treated as having
a disability for during the period of three years starting on 2 December
1996 (when the DDA employment provisions came into force). This
applied regardless of whether the person met the DDA definition of a
disabled person during that period. Following the end of the three-year
transitional period, those persons who were treated by this provision as
being disabled are now treated as having a disability in the past. This
provision is preserved for the purposes of the Equality Act 2010.See Note 3.
•	 Persistent distractibility or difficulty concentrating;
•	 Compulsive activities or behaviour, or difficulty in adapting after a
reasonable period to minor changes in a routine.
@@>
@@@ An illustrative and non-exhaustive list of factors which, if they are experienced by a person, it would not be reasonable to regard as having a substantial adverse effect on normal day-to-day activities. Whether a person satisfies the definition of a disabled person for the purposes of the Act will depend upon the full circumstances of the case. That is, whether the substantial adverse effect of the impairment on normal dayto-day activities is long term.

•	 Inability to move heavy objects without assistance or a mechanical aid,
such as moving a large suitcase or heavy piece of furniture without a
trolley;

•	 Experiencing some discomfort as a result of travelling, for example by car
or plane, for a journey lasting more than two hours;

•	 Experiencing some tiredness or minor discomfort as a result of walking
unaided for a distance of about 1.5 kilometres or one mile;

•	 Minor problems with writing or spelling;
•	 Inability to reach typing speeds standardised for secretarial work;
•	 Inability to read very small or indistinct print without the aid of a
magnifying glass;

•	 Inability to fill in a long, detailed, technical document, which is in the
person’s native language, without assistance;

•	 Inability to speak in front of an audience simply as a result of nervousness;
•	 Some shyness and timidity;
•	 Inability to articulate certain sounds due to a lisp;
•	 Inability to be understood because of having a strong accent;
•	 Inability to converse orally in a language which is not the speaker’s native
spoken language;

•	 Inability to hold a conversation in a very noisy place, such as a factory
floor, a pop concert, sporting event or alongside a busy main road;

•	 Inability to sing in tune;
•	 Inability to distinguish a known person across a substantial distance (e.g.
across the width of a football pitch);

•	 Occasionally forgetting the name of a familiar person, such as a colleague;
•	 Inability to concentrate on a task requiring application over several hours;
•	 Occasional apprehension about significant heights;
•	 A person consciously taking a higher than normal risk on their own

initiative, such as persistently crossing a road when the signals are adverse,
or driving fast on highways for own pleasure;

•	 Simple inability to distinguish between red and green, which is not
accompanied by any other effect such as blurring of vision;

•	 Infrequent minor incontinence;
•	 Inability to undertake activities requiring delicate hand movements, such
as threading a small needle or picking up a pin.
@@>
